From: dave@questar.QUESTAR.MN.ORG (David Becker)
Subject: Re: VI vs. EMACS
Date: 7 Oct 87 22:52:52 GMT
Reply-To: dave@questar.UUCP (David Becker)
Summary: no need to start lots of vi's

I know "how to" VI tips shouldn't become the main subject of this
group but I've seen SO many complaints about 

     not being able to edit several files in one VI session 
 and not being able yank from one file and paste into another 
 
I feel obligated straighten all those EMACS lovers out plus make 
some peoples lives easier (like that guy who starts lots of VI jobs).

If just knowing this is possible is enough for you, hit n


Preliminary little help:
 
 EXINIT is an environment variable to setup vi how you like it
 for example this is mine:
  
setenv EXINIT 'set wm=10 ai aw|map g :map v |map Y y$'

  ASIDE to the guy(or gal) who asked about changing bindings in VI:
     Those map things above do it. I use g like the "start recording
     macro in EMACS" command - ^X( I believe.


On to the real business:

   editing more than one file in VI type:
      (without starting zillions of jobs)

    :set aw   (I do this with EXINIT)
    :n file_name    

    now in your new file and you want to go back do
    :n other_name

    and you'll be at the same place in 'other_name'

    another way to do this if you know what you'll be editing is
    vi file1 file2 file3 ...
    then when your done with file1, :n will move you to the next file


To yank from one file and paste into another:

    Before yanking or deleting the section to move designate a buffer
    for the text to go into.  There are 26 buffers possible (a-z).
    For example to delete a line into buffer a type:
     "add
     or to yank in it use "ayy

     Normal deletes and yanks will not affect this buffer of course.

     Now change files with the :n command as described above.
     To paste your buffer into the new file type:
     "ap
     To append text to a buffer use its CAPITAL name:
      to add a line to buffer a type "Ayy

I know emacs has a ring of kill buffers, how VI does this:

 "1p will put your last delete, "2p will put your second to last
 delete, etc...
 To search through the kill buffers start with "1p then hit . and
 buffers 2 to 9 will be pasted in successively (but without deleting
 what the previous buffers contributed to your file).


On the VI vs EMACS war:
 I had to use EMACS at my previous employer and before I learned about
 the above stuff I was torn as to which i prefered.  EMACS took awfully
 long to startup and had ugly control sequences but had those 
 nifty macros and buffers while vi let you(or so I thought) edit only a 
 file at a time w/o macros but used normal keys for commands.

 FLAME: A novice at either editor should comment only on the learning
 process for their editor not what their favorite editor can do
 which that other one can't.
-- 
David Becker                   Disclaimer: Could anyone hold these opinions?
dave@questar.MN.ORG                                      % cd ~ron_raygun; pwd
Stamp out penguin lust -- just say NO                    /dev/null


