README.txt - Clewn.

Clewn is a GDB wrapper that controls the VIM editor through NetBeans. The
Clewn user interface uses readline and, with very few exceptions, is the same
as the GDB command line interface. Clewn stands for Command Line Editor Worker
on NetBeans.

Clewn can only be used with gvim, as vim, the version of VIM that runs in a
terminal, does not support NetBeans.

COMPILING AND INSTALLATION
See INSTALL.

DOCUMENTATION
See the user manual in doc/clewn.txt, or type the vim command ':help clewn'
within VIM.

FEATURES

* Any GDB command can be mapped in VIM to a key sequence using VIM key
  mappings. This allows, for example, to set/clear a breakpoint or print a
  variable's value at the current cursor or mouse position by just hitting a
  key.

* You can send an interrupt from VIM to GDB and the program it is running.

* An expression value or a variable value (as given by GDB) is displayed in a
  balloon in Vim, when the mouse pointer is hovering over the selected
  expression or the variable.

* A variable can be "dropped" and watched in the VIM "gdb-variables.gdbvar"
  window by pointing the mouse on the variable in the source code  and
  hitting a key. The variable's value is updated and highlighted whenever
  changed. To remove a variable, just delete it from the VIM
  "gdb-variables.gdbvar" window with a VIM command or a keystroke.

* Assembly buffers hold the assembly code for functions that miss the source
  code and are being stepped through, or where breakpoints have been set. This
  feature can be selected by an option on Clewn command line.

* Breakpoints are highlighted in source code and in the assembly buffers. The
  highlighting includes the last two digits of the breakpoint number so that
  they can be easily identified. Disabled breakpoints are noted with a
  different highlighting color. Clewn automatically finds the source file for
  the breakpoint if it exists, and tells VIM to load and display the file
  and highlight the line. When there is no debugging information or source
  files and the assembly option has been enabled, Clewn disassembles the
  function containing the breakpoint and VIM displays and highlights its
  line.

* Each time GDB displays a stack frame, Clewn automatically finds the source
  file for that frame and tells VIM to display and highlight the line. When
  there is no source code for the frame or when doing instruction stepping
  (stepi, nexti) the program counter line within an assembly window is
  highlighted.

* The project file stores the current gdb settings. They are automatically
  sourced by clewn on gdb startup and saved by clewn when quitting or when
  restarting gdb. These settings are the gdb current working directory, the
  program file to debug, the command line arguments passed to this program
  when run by gdb, and the list of breakpoints set in this program.

* Depending on the GDB version you are using, Clewn may run in two different
  modes: level 2 when using GDB annotations level 2 and level 3 when using
  GDB/MI and the new annotations level 3. Mode selection is automatically done
  by Clewn at startup.

* The clever GDB command and file name completion. This also works while
  entering a GDB user-defined sequence of commands or a list of commands for
  a breakpoint.


AUTHOR
Xavier de Gaye    <xdegaye at users dot sourceforge dot net>

